---
layout: post
title:  "Planning"
date:   2016-02-19 19:00:00 +0000
categories: progress update planning
---
### Planning summary

#### Timescale

| Date    | Progress                                                      |
|---------|:--------------------------------------------------------------|
| *24/02* | recitation of a set of short term rhythms                     |
| *02/03* | recitation of a set of short term rhythms & pitch sequences   |
| *09/03* | continuation of a set of short term rhythms & pitch sequences |
| *16/03* | recitation of a set of long term rhythms                      |
| *23/03* | recitation of a set of long term pitch sequences              |
| *30/03* | recitation of a set of long term rhythm & pitch sequences     |
| *06/04* | continuation of a set of long term rhythm & pitch sequences   |
| *13/04* | recitation of a set of hybrid pitch sequences                 |
| *20/04* | recitation of a set of hybrid rhythm & pitch sequences        |
| *27/04* | continuation of a set of hybrid rhythm & pitch sequences      |

#### Problem stages

* **Rhythm (short term)** - the rhythmic patterns occuring across a set of 
bars
* **Rhythm (long term)** - the rhythmic patterns that repeat in non-adjacent 
bars
* **Rhythm (hybrid)** - simultaneous application of short and long term rhythm
* **Pitch sequence (short term)** - the trends in pitch intervals across a set 
of bars
* **Pitch sequence (long term)** - the pitch patterns that repeat in 
non-adjacent bars
* **Pitch sequence (hybrid)** - simultaneous application of short and long 
term pitch sequences
* **Harmony** - the additional notes and melodies occuring over the top of an 
existing monophonic melody

#### Solution stages

* **Exact recitation of one sample** - training against a single sample and 
recreating that sample from small inputs
* **Approximate recitation of a set of trained samples** - training against a 
set of samples and approximately recreating those samples starting from small 
inputs
* **Approximate continuation of a set of untrained samples** - training 
against a set of samples and providing human-satisfactory continuations for a 
different set of samples

### Notes

The ordering of the tasks is based on expected difficulty. The earlier tasks 
are expected to be easier than the later tasks, even with respect to work done 
in prior weeks; this is intended to correspond to my own availability and 
expected motivation levels throughout the project. 

A large chunk of the work constitutes combining previously achieved results; 
whether melody and rhythm or short term and long term. This is expected to be 
challenging, and may require some steps back to be taken. However, given the 
working state of each of the component solutions, 1 week should be an 
acceptable time frame for this.

Exact recitation of a single sample is considered to generally be a fairly 
trivial task in most cases. None of the given problems should be unrealistic 
in this regard, but there are many uncertainties and complications may arise 
(particularly with regards to combined pitch/rhythm problems), in which case 
the schedule will need to be adjusted. Continuation is likely to be a much 
more difficult problem to solve, but one whose solution consitutes a 
significant milestone at any stage

Nowhere in the planned timescale is harmonization submitted as a problem to be 
solved; the reason for this is that it is a particularly difficult problem to 
solve and is not intrinsically linked to monophonic melody generation, unlike 
all of the other problems that are listed. Therefore, barring exceptional 
progress starting early in the project, harmonization will not be attempted in 
this project.

Another problem not even mentioned above is the usage of imperfections in the 
music resulting from (or emulating) human performance. This is a fairly 
important feature in a lot of music, and has been the subject of previous 
research. However, it is also a difficult problem that is commonly solved by 
methods that are unrelated to the methods being used in this project. As such, 
it can be considered ancillary to the actual purpose of this AI; particularly 
as the human composer being assisted by the AI will likely be capable of 
making the necessary alterations if they are wanted.
